wanted to make a brief video talking
about the most fundamental differences
between the Chinese and english-speaking
Western European approach to political
science to politics in practice these
differences to some extent exist in
ancient philosophies but they primarily
exist in the minds and attitudes and
beliefs of people here and now today so
to give an example the influence of the
work of the Xiang John Chu the book of
Lord Shang is all we call it in English
it doesn't really matter if you want to
construct in your mind a feeble that
this has some kind of broad cultural
significance that the average Chinese
person knows or that somehow reaches
children and their cribs or as a fable
the reality is we have plenty of
evidence of political leaders including
an historical figure like Mao Zedong
studying it and writing essays on it in
school it has very real political
influence here and now even though it is
a part of classical or ancient Chinese
culture so in the same way you could
construct a theory that the philosophy
of Machiavelli may or may not be
influential in Italy today I don't know
maybe Machiavelli is more influential in
Italian politics than he is in American
politics or French politics or something
another example being Napoleon Bonaparte
how many politicians today have read
anything written by Napoleon Bonaparte
or written about the history of Napoleon
Bonaparte I think in Western culture
that might certainly would be a
specialized area of study before you
would make the claim that the historical
experience of what happened with the
Poland was influential today but on the
other hand as we all know there are some
texts and there are some sets of ideas
that no one would really question the
significance of everything I'm talking
about here in terms of East and West is
on that level of self-evident obvious
Ness and yet I think if you'll stick
with me for just a few minutes the three
fundamental points I'm going to make in
this video probably we're not all that
obvious to you
number one is the contrast between the
great centralizing tendency of the
Chinese Empire and the balance of powers
theory in European and Western
civilization it is so commonplace as to
be a meaningless canard that Europeans
when teaching when giving university
lectures to one another you know in
Europe and United States it's so
commonplace for them to say oh the
unique thing about the history of China
is this obsession with unifying the
Empire and there are quotations that are
rolled out the Empire United must be
divided the Empire divided must be
United this sense that somehow the
course of Chinese history is an epic
struggle to unify this enormous
territory that's linguistically and
culturally diverse and can never be
peaceful unified what I find lacking is
any honest appraisal of what you are
contrasting this to so I was just
talking to my girlfriend about the
political history of India it would be
very different if we were having an
honest appraisal of the political
history of China over let's say just a
1000 year period to the same period of
1000 years in India or the same period
of 1,000 years in Europe and I found all
of my professors in departments of
politics and the department's of Asian
Studies really incredibly reluctant to
have this sort of honest reckoning and
look let's admit it right now what's the
ultimate taboo
what does nobody want to talk about what
is situated geographically right in the
middle in terms of trade routes between
China and Europe between India and
Europe it's gravy ax have you heard of
Saudi Arabia it's one of the most
powerful countries in the world today
it's one of the most influential empires
wave after wave of Islamic imperialism
what about that over a period of 1,000
years can we compare that to China is
China really obsessed with conquest and
centralization
compared to say the Mughal Empire
compared to any of the Muslim empires
that
Rosenfeld a lot of these people
including professors here in the
Department of Asian Studies at UVic that
I have some sympathy for that I like as
people their utter ly lacking in any
kind of down-to-earth reasonable
contrasting approach to talking about
politics this way and it's in that down
to earth reasonable way that we should
approach all politics
what is the contrast between China's
supposed obsession with unifying and
centralizing the Empire and what
happened in Europe just 300 years ago
Europe was completely dominated by the
concept of the balance of powers and
they fought Wars again and again not to
establish any one Empire having hegemony
over all the rest but on the contrary to
preserve a perpetual balance of multiple
roughly equally powerful empires each
being counter posed against the other
Austria could not be allowed to unify
with Germany the German states plural
why the balance of powers why was the
nation of Belgium created we recently
saw the museum's of national history in
Belgium and military so why did they
create Belgium because the British and
the Russians and other foreign powers
but especially the British said no no if
we allow Belgium and France to become
one country France will be too powerful
if we allow Belgium and the Netherlands
to come one country if we allow Belgium
to become part of the Dutch Empire then
the Dutch Empire will be too powerful we
must preserve the balance of powers what
what would happen if Spain and France
became one country it was gonna happen
it was prevented by a war that all of
Europe basically participated in ended
with his ever call the Treaty of Utrecht
France and Spain had to be prevented
from unifying and in a bizarre way even
the the state
managing of power from Rome on a small
scale within Italy in the Mediterranean
and the whole of Europe the idea of
keeping more or less equally balanced
powers constantly at each other's throat
was the core of European political
science
it was hardwired into our concept of
diplomacy our concept of even why
aristocrats exist and why everstik rats
intermarry and why their negotiate with
each other and it is in a word complete
madness it's a formula for perpetual war
within Europe and also without Europe
outside of Europe in South America North
America the colonization of Africa the
colonization of Asia and it's a very
strange parallel universe history to ask
how would any of these things have
played out if just if we had just
allowed Austria and Germany
Naches Austria the austro-hungarian
Empire which was much bigger than
Austria to unify with the German states
why why couldn't France and Spain become
one country or whatever why couldn't the
Dutch and the Belgians I don't even care
who what why couldn't we have formed
larger or even just one Empire one
Emperor one democracy whatever you want
to imagine for all of Europe it was
because of the fascination with the
balance of power as ideology utterly a
part of an aristocratic worldview in
Europe that is now in some ways
disappeared I would say the last sincere
proponents of the balance of powers
ideology were the people who used to
surround me in academia the people who
sincerely lamented the end of the Soviet
Union the end of communism in Europe
because it meant the end of a
quote/unquote multipolar system in which
the Soviet Union held the United States
in check in the United States held the
Soviet Union check and many countries
around the world were allied with one of
these two poles that is a balance of
powers mentality the assumption that the
world would be a better place if it were
constantly on the edge of nuclear war
and if places like Afghanistan had body
counts
seedings 1 million because of the
struggles between different branches of
the Communist Party to control its and
various anti-communist machinations to
drive out the communists etc the
incredibly blood-soaked history of
Afghanistan during the Cold War of
course I could throw in here examples of
Cambodia Laos Vietnam than many other
places around the world where the Cold
War was not really so cold but quite hot
not even to mention South Korea versus
North Korea etc etc it's madness that is
the balance of powers ideology and I can
say to you sincerely I have never once
been at a single political science
lecture on any period of European or
Western world history that even
questioned the balance of powers
ideology everything else has been
questioned including just warrior Chi
European imperialism all kinds of things
but that the balance of powers notion is
one of the most influential in our
culture and it's only from that
perspective that it seems like madness
that all of China should have one
capital city what's so crazy about that
it means that no two provinces of China
orbit each other
that's very fundamentally what it means
it means they have one army and one
currency one one form of economic unit
of trade etc etc as you guys know with
history China definitely doesn't mean
they have one language it doesn't mean
they have one Church they didn't have a
Roman Catholic Church they didn't have
those other forms of unifying and
oppressive elements so I think this is
still today one of the most powerful
warping factors in terms of mutual
perception and misperception of Europe
versus versus the Chinese world number
two on my list these are a little bit
quicker the last two of the three is the
concept of rule of law as such there are
a lot of misconceptions about this I
think Europeans like to imagine that in
Europe alone we have this really high
estimate of the value of the rule of law
whether that is attributed to the Roman
Empire or maybe some local king
Charlamagne in France and Germany or
whatever some some beloved king in the
history of England that somehow
Europeans value that the rule of law and
the Chinese not this is this is false it
is true that the concept of rule of law
is different in Europe China India and
the Muslim world that would be a really
great four-way comparison to teach
political history I've never seen it
done um but if we're just contrasting
China to Europe the text I already
mentioned the Shang jewel the book of
Lord Shang is this really useful really
rapid introduction to ste test attitudes
towards law and order in history of
China and again Mao Zedong personally
read it was influenced by it I think
every single politically sophisticated
person in China studied this either
formally in university I think the book
of Lord Shang is more widely right in
China today than the United States
Constitution is read within the United
States not that many people that states
a good percentage don't get me wrong so
it is it is a really mega influential
work and in that book the book of Lord
Shang it's stated with a brutal
simplicity that can never be translated
that you are better off being ruled by a
bunch of gang rapists I'll say a bit
more why it says that Chinese you're
better off having rulers who are a bunch
of gang rapists but who follow written
law as opposed to having good man or the
best of all possible man but who rule
personally who just rule as men without
the rule of law this is a paraphrase
from memory but as you can imagine one
of the things that stood out to me and I
first read that I was looking at the
English and the Chinese is this the use
of the word for rape in there and I do
think it's really specifically alluding
the fact that like in most ancient
cultures in pre-modern China conquest
was really linked to rape and gang rape
and you see that throughout pre-modern
literature that when when a city was
conquered or sacked we use these things
that
sack of Rome we use the word sack and
looted in that looting and pillaging and
conquest did really involve rape and it
was gang-raped by military men so it was
not in some abstract sense that you were
saying being ruled by a bunch of gang
rapists the type of people who conquered
and came into power by force very often
were men with that kind of background in
their resume but it's saying what really
matters is written law above all else
before Ellis that having an evil man
having a tear again it's not even that
implausible having a conqueror who's
committed unspeakable atrocities
unspeakable atrocities that's how he
came into power she's often true at the
start of a new dynasty in China or after
any given war the winners the people who
came out on tight top the winners and
the people who came out on top may have
been the most brutal the most ruthless
the most unscrupulous they've committed
atrocities but what's crucial in
separating them from mere bandits who've
gone into power is the belief in written
law so I have to say it's this is
something where I feel like Western
political science political philosophies
mainstream politics has almost inverted
the role of east and west
I don't feel we have that and again I
mean it's surreal to say Mao Zedong
personally was was actually profound Lee
influenced by this too it may have been
true in ancient Athens that's actually
topic for another video they talk about
what was the role of written law in
ancient Athens but there's no doubt that
today in every Western democracy I'm
familiar with it's the moral character
of the people it's the spirit of the men
the particular men or women who hold
office who interpret the law in the
Supreme Court the same one sentence
fragment in the law in the Supreme Court
we feel can be interpreted one way or
another it can grant gay people rights
or can deprive them of rights he told
this with no change in their written law
I think if anything we're living through
a period of time where there is less
faith than ever in the Western world in
a written law and we all hang on the
notion that we can choose morally good
people in whom we place our
faith hope expectations and optimism
including hilariously someone like
Barack Obama who utterly failed to
deliver on his honest election promises
and so on got the Nobel Peace Prize
anyway it's on and so forth so that's
that that is a very fundamental element
and I think I mean I think it really can
be said if you asked what today do
Chinese people have to believe in not
communism because it's a joke you think
they don't know then they can't look or
you think they can't read you know the
little red book by Mao Zedong they can't
look at what communism is supposed to be
and the reality of what their economy
society is do think they can't see the
difference between communism in theory
and their capitalist society in practice
you know do you think they're unaware of
that but something they can believe in
is written law the rule of law and they
do have that affirmed we just had
another case I'll get the guys name
wrong of a guy his his net worth the
amount he took in bribery's was over 100
million US dollars is the numbers are
unbelievable but there were ever eat I'm
and it's under siege in ping it happens
all the time
every time an elite member of the
government is even executed but stopped
put on trial thrown in prison and
tortured executed for taking bribes and
so on this this doesn't affirm your
belief in communism
this doesn't affirm your belief in
particular man ruling in government
that's not what the faith isn't it's the
idea that written law has a validity
intrinsic to written law as written law
apart from the men even if they are
terrible people individually
collectively as a social class or what
have you that the value of law is
something that stands quite separately
from the value of men who implemented
number three has to do with the role of
both dissent and scientific progress now
I will just point out some but I mean
all the time I say things and then I
google them because I think someone else
must have said it before me and again
again I'm shocked no one has made the
point before in the English language or
that I can find through Google so this
may be something I'm the first person
say there's a really important sense in
which political dissent and scientific
progress are one and the same thing in
Western culture Copernicus and Galileo
alright and this is so Copernicus and
Galileo the fundamental discovery that
the earth goes around the Sun that the
design of the solar system inverting the
assumptions of the Catholic Church this
is yes it is in part a scientific
discovery but its whole significance for
us in Western civilization and again
every area type person knows this story
definitely in Europe I think to a lesser
extent the United States and Canada it's
a crucial turning point in the history
of European civilization the emergence
from the Dark Ages into the Renaissance
so the scientific breakthroughs that
really begin with Galileo or at least at
least how we imagine it how we tell the
story how we tell the fable begin with
Galileo standing up to the the Catholic
Church what is Galileo
he's a dissident being persecuted and
put in prison by the government yes by
the church by an era when you know
government and church are pretty much
one of the same right he doesn't just
symbolize scientific progress he
symbolizes political dissent and again
even if it is fictional that that is how
we imagine Charles Darwin I'm not going
to give a hundred examples here guys but
you could we imagine Charles Darwin even
guys who just invent new new
technologies new forms engineer but we
imagine Charles Darwin as standing
outside the church and outside of
government and writing these shocking
treaties is the shocking new political
ideas and then him being a dissident and
the establishment inveighing against him
and so on and in the end the truth must
win this is really the Western narrative
of scientific progress and that idea is
utterly lacking in Chinese civilization
not the thing in we have what you don't
know what
it's a fable it's a fable in both the
east and west how did the United States
put a man on the moon was it because of
dissidents standing outside the White
House and saying you politicians don't
know how to put a man on the moon but I
do was it because of a figure like
Galileo you know dissident you know
complain yes the government is something
was it that the plucky underdog standing
up to political power no you know an
unbelievable amount of taxpayers money
was poured into a government program
that was completely hierarchical and
top-down a lot of scientific progress
comes from the center comes from the
elite levels as an is handed down and
the point is here the Chinese in terms
of how they remember the history of
scientific progress and their
relationship between Authority the
government the Emperor even religion in
as much as Chinese religion is this
diffused tradition of Buddhism
Confucianism and Taoism and other
sources no for them the concept of even
scientific progress but I think all
progress is something radiating out from
the center top-down from the hierarchy
and where they fundamentally do not
value dissent the same way we do because
they do not think of dissent in terms of
progress and even science in the way
that we do okay those are my three
points three a not an exclusive list but
a list of three really important
fundamental differences in the Chinese
versus Western European english-speaking
approaches to politics not just in
ancient history right now in the 21st
century